Hello everyone, thanks for coming to my talk. My name is Jun. I'm a PhD student in linguistics
at the University of Pennsylvania, and today I'll be talking about ggplot internals and
my package ggtrace.
So I suspect that most of us here are already pretty familiar with ggplot, but just to get
a sense of the room, how many of us has made, like, a box plot in a ggplot before? Alright,
that's like literally everyone. Cool. And I make them all the time too. It's like one
of the first plots I make when I get results back from an experiment. So let's say like
a behavioral data of, like, button presses. So each row is a response from a participant,
and there's columns for experiment condition and response time. So I can write a short
code where I pass my data to ggplot, map condition to x and fill, and response times to y, and
add a geom box plot layer. Pretty straightforward. That gives me a box plot. So that was very
simple to do in ggplot. And oftentimes I'll have participants who are behaving, let's
say, more interestingly than others, and I care about identifying them for a lot of reasons.
So I might also want to annotate the cutoff value for extreme outliers, like this. And
of course I should calculate it myself if I, like, really care and if it's really important,
but I'm just doing a quick exploratory analysis, and I already know how to tell ggplot to calculate
this for me. So labeling that same value should be a trivial task, right? Except it
turns out this is kind of tricky, because what we're trying to do is do something like
a box plot layer, except divert its normal course of action under the hood. So our new
layer should calculate the same variable as our first layer, but then instead of using
boxes and whiskers to draw all of them, it should label just one of them. And when it
comes to these situations where the user wants to intervene in the process power layer
comes to life, there's good news and bad news. The good news is, thanks to recent developers,
we can write a layer that does all this, all inside, and all on the fly, all inside a geom
label layer. So that's great, but the bad news is this is incomprehensible. Like, this
is not your typical ggplot code. So we have strange functions called inside the AES, like
stage and after stat, and we're using the stat and data arguments of the geom label
layer, which we don't often do. So this is still vanilla ggplot, but this kind of code
is very difficult to reason about, because it requires a mental model of how ggplot internals
work. And here's what I mean by that. So the code for our first layer is easy, because
we can get away with thinking about a layer as just doing one big thing. So like, hey
geom boxplot, here's all the stuff you need, now go do your thing. But we need to revise
this simple model of how layers are built to understand code like the second layer,
which reads more like, hey layer, you know that data that I gave you to draw? Apply this
function to it first, and then proceed as normal with condition map to X and response
times map to Y. Then after the boxplot stat steps in and transforms the data, then use
the computed variable Y max to remap to the Y aesthetic and do the same for the label
aesthetic. And then lastly, use the label geom to draw what you have. That was a mouthful,
and you get the point. What appeared to be a simple task of annotating a boxplot variable
turns out to require a deep understanding of what goes on where in the internals. And
it's not just because there's more code that is difficult. It's conceptually difficult,
because it makes references to different steps in the internals that we as users don't get
to see. And I don't know about you, but I would love to be able to write code like this.
So if a knowledge, if it requires the knowledge of the internals, if that's what it takes,
then maybe ggplot internals aren't just for developers anymore. And so that's what I want
to talk about today. I would like to propose a model of ggplot internals for users. One
that's immediately practical to users just wanting to get better at ggplot, but also
one that offers an accessible starting point for aspiring developers who want to extend
ggplot. So here's my proposal in a nutshell. Why don't we just pretend that ggplot internals
is a one big data wrangling function? Because it kind of is. And to do that, I have developed
my package ggtrace, which I'll be showcasing today. So here is the outline for the rest
of my talk. So first I'll introduce this reframing of ggplot internals as data wrangling, which
will also provide context and motivation for my package ggtrace. And then I'll demonstrate
how we can put this idea into practice using a simple example, using functions from ggtrace,
starting with an example of a bar plot, and then returning to our box plot annotation
problem and then building up the solution from scratch. So our dive into the internals
begins with this factual observation that each layer of a ggplot has an underlying data
frame representation. So in other words, layers are just data frames until they get drawn.
So we can actually see this using ggplot's own layer data function. So we pass it our
plot and the index of the layer we want to inspect, and it gives us the data that's underlying
the box plot layer of our plot. And this is the actual data frame that gets sent off to
the quote unquote drawing system, which is kind of like the graphical object land with
like grid functions and gtable functions. But for our purposes, we'll just pretend that
all of the internals is a function that just takes the raw data that we give it, which
is the experiment data that we provided, and makes it drawing ready, like this, and
does this process for every layer in our plot according to each layer's own specifications.
And this doesn't look too bad, right? Our input was a tidy data, and the output is just
another tidy data, where each row represents a box plot, and the columns are aesthetics
that describe each box plot, including the value for the upper whiskers stored in the
Y max column. And crucially, as you might suspect, this process of making a layer's
data drawing ready happens in steps, not all at once. So why do we care about that as users?
Well, because again, different pieces of the code that we write also kicks in in different
steps, step by step, to make the layer's data more and more drawing ready. So it's literally
like data wrangling happening under the hood, except you don't get to see your data again
after it goes off and off your hands. So kind of like this.
So I'm simplifying things a bit here, but for our purposes as users, we can think of
the internals as divided up or sliced into these four big steps, which I'll call the
before stat, the before geom, or before stat, after stat, before geom, and after scale.
And because they happen in order, how a piece of our code, layer code, changes the current
state of a data in this pipeline at one step has consequences for what kind of code we
can write for that data in another step. So, so far, so good. Now we just need to see what
the data actually looks like at these steps. So we go digging into the internals, and we
find that the data passes through these scary looking things called ggproto methods, and
not like the kind of dplyr functions we're familiar with. And the four steps that we
care about as users, those are also the inputs and outputs of these ggproto methods. These
three to be exact. So in the internals, the raw data is input, and the before stat data
is the state of the layer data when it's passed into the layer ggproto objects compute statistic
method, that the after stat data is the output of that same method, and then the before geom
data is the input to this next method, and then the after scale data is the output of
this other method, and then some more stuff happens, and then the data becomes drawing
ready, and then it gets sent off to be drawn. So the fact that the internals are written
this way is a big reason why it's deliberately kept hidden from us users. ggproto is scary,
and we're honestly, like, better off not knowing anything about them. Like this first method
here, layer compute statistic, it looks like this, and it's like nothing you've seen before.
It's like a function, but it's composed of two other functions, and it has this argument
called self, which is like a big thing from object oriented programming that's like very
intimidating to me as an R user, and maybe to you too, although if you are interested
in OOP, you're in the right place just like 40 minutes earlier, and this method is actually
also like a nested call to several other ggproto methods, and they're like all written in like
base R, and it can get very overwhelming, and then recently they also added in like
vectors integration and CLI integration, and it's a lot. Like, okay, I wanted to know what
goes on in the internals, but not like this. This is developer territory, right? All I care
about is just seeing the data, like give me the data frame so that I can anticipate
what my code will do in the middle of the pipeline when it kicks in, and so that's the
motivation behind ggtrace. So ggtrace is a package that allows us, the users, to drop
inside, like parachute down this internal pipeline at any point we want and intercept
the data at that step and interact with it using the kind of data wrangling tools that
we're already familiar with. So ggtrace comes with a family of workflow functions in the
form of ggtrace action value, which all take three arguments, the ggplot object, the ggproto
method, and when to interact with that method. So this talk will showcase just two functions
from the inspect workflow, ggtrace inspect args and ggtrace inspect return, which lets
us take a snapshot of a layer's data as it goes in and out of ggproto methods. So for
example, if we want to look at the state of a layer's data in the before stat stage, then
we can use ggtrace inspect args to intercept the data that was passed into layer compute
statistic when it is first called for our plot, which gives us the box plot layers after
stat data. And then likewise, if we want to look at the layers after stat, or sorry, that
was the before stat data. If we want to look at the after stat data, we need to use ggtrace
inspect return instead to intercept the data when it is returned by that same method, which
gives us the box plot layers after stat data. So now that we're equipped with the tools
to peek inside the internals, let's use these inspect functions to walk through how a layer
gets built for the bar plot, step by step. And we'll be using the penguins data set.
So if you're not familiar, this is a data set where each row is a penguin with columns
for a species and bill length. And so using geom bar, we can visualize the count of penguins
in each species by mapping the species column to x and fill. So like simple, right? Pretty
straightforward. We don't really think about how layers are built in steps when we write
code like this, but once we spell out the defaults, like stat equals count and y equals
after stat count, we see clear parallels to our more complex box plot annotation layer,
which is why I like this example. So in the internals, the bar layers data starts off
as the penguins data and ends up in its drawing ready form. And to see how this all happens,
we use ggtrace to intercept the data at the four steps that we care about.
So let's look at some data frames. We start by intercepting the data at the before stat
stage. So we use ggtrace inspect rs again to pull out the data argument that was passed
into this ggproto method, which gives us a data frame that looks like this. So here are
initial aesthetic mappings are reflected in the presence of these columns named after
the actual aesthetics, like x and fill, which is like basically select and rename. And we
see some other things that happen to the data at this point as well, like the x is numeric
and we have these new columns like panel and group. If we pass a function to the data argument
of the layer, this is also the point by which that would get applied to our data. And, but
the real significance of the before stat data is that it validates the layers choice of
stat. So our before stat data has a column for x and that satisfies the layers count
stat, which requires either on x or y aesthetic as we see from the documentation. If we specify
both x and y like this, then the plot fails to build and it errors specifically at stat
count. And so we can set error equals true in our ggtrace function to debug the layers
data. And here we can see the reason why it's because both the columns x and y are present
when the stat goes in to look at the data. And we, if we, uh, but as long as the stat
has what it needs, then it will transform the data, spit it back out for us to see in
the after stat stage. So at this point we see that the data basically underwent a group
by and summarize. So we have one row for each bar and new variables like count and prop.
So the after stat stage is significant because it's an opportunity for us to declare more
aesthetic mappings except we can use variables from this after stat data frame. So the fact
that we have a column called count in the after stat data is what allows this default
mapping of y equals after stat count. And that's essentially just calling mutate y equals
count on the after stat data. And like, this isn't just a metaphor, like aesthetic mappings
are literally powered by tidy evil. So the symbol count is evaluated to the vector count.
So you can do things like y equals count over a sum of count, which will give you proportions
and have consequences down the line for the plot. And any after stat mappings that we
declare like this will get applied to the data for us to see by the time the data reaches
the before geom stage. So we see now the data has that y column present when we intercepted
here. And just like in the before stat, the before geom step data, the before geom's data
validates the layer's choice of geom. So here we have both x and y columns present and that
satisfies our layer's geom, which is geom bar and it requires both x and y aesthetics.
If we instead override this default and not map anything to y at all by setting it to
null, then the stat is satisfied, but the geom down the line is not. So it's geom bar
that throws the error. And so conceptually we can see how after scale mappings are sometimes
necessary to make a stat and a geom work. So every layer has a stat and a geom and they
need to fit together to make a layer come to life.
Okay. So the next time that we intercept the data is in the after scale stage. So by this
point, the non-positional scales have stepped in to transform aesthetics like fill, which
is now a column of the actual color values instead of the names of the penguin species.
We also see that the bar geom has stepped in to add default values for bar related aesthetics,
which are again, just columns like color and size. This stage is significant because just
like the after stat, we can declare more aesthetic mappings one last time before the data sent
off to be drawn. So for example, we have the size column by this point representing the
thickness of the borders around the bars. It's actually kind of hard to tell the default
value. It's small. So if we wanted to make it like five times thicker than it was originally
going to be, then like you can kind of just do that on the fly, grab the size column when
it exists in the after scale data, multiply it by five and map it or assign it back to
the size aesthetic. And it's kind of like, so aesthetic mappings are kind of like scheduling
a mutate call on your data for later. And this can happen on the fly without us needing
to figure out the default value first. And then, you know, for the database folks in
the room, this is also what allows you to do stuff like make the outline of the bars
a little bit darker than the fill of the bars. And then that can make your plots look prettier.
I'll just leave this here for you if you want to look at it later. So that concludes our
bar plot walkthrough. So to recap, a layer's data becomes drawing ready in steps in the
internals and using the inspect function from ggtrace, we were able to see what the data
looks like at a certain steps and crucially how the state of the layer's data can inform
what kind of layer code that we can write. And so with that, we circle back to our box
plot annotation layer. Again, we have this box plot of response times by condition that
we made at the beginning. And we would like to add a layer labeling the value of the upper
whisker in the second box plot. And so applying what we just learned, we can write this layer
in steps just like how the layer itself is built up in steps. So this is kind of a hard
code. So we'll get stuck at some point, but then I'll show you how we can use ggtrace
to debug our way out of it. So first thing we start is a high level description of what
we want. So every layer has a stat and a geom, so maybe let's start there. We want to use
a label to draw a box plot variable. In code, that means geom label with stat equals box
plot or stat box plot with geom equals label. Again, every layer needs both, and it's actually
your choice of syntax. They're the same thing. And next we can specify the data that we want
the layer to plot. So we only care about the second box plot. We say filter for condition
is B, and let that apply. Then we build up the aesthetic mappings, starting with the
ones that the stat needs first, because the stat always receives the data first. So we
specify the X and the Y, and then additional ones that the geom might need later, like
label, which we want to be the same as the Y max value that the stat computes. And so
that gives us this big chunk of code, and we're almost there, except for this error
that says geom label is missing a Y aesthetic. And like what? We do have a Y aesthetic here.
So maybe we're not sure what's wrong, but we know how to debug this. The geom is complaining
about a missing aesthetic, and so something must be wrong with the data that it receives.
So then we inspect the before geom snapshot of the layer's data, and we do see that the
Y column has been dropped. So it turns out that the box plot stat consumes the Y column
and then returns a summary across multiple columns like this, so the Y column is missing
now. So to resolve that, we can use the stage function, again, this is a ggplot stage function,
to map Y at the start to satisfy the stat, and then remap to Y in the after stat to satisfy
the geom. And then that gets us the layer that we want, because this ensures that both
the before stat data and the before geom data has a Y column present. So then that's what
finally gets the layer working.
So that concludes cracking open ggplot internals with ggtrace. Again, ggtrace is helpful. It
helps us learn the internals as users by exploiting the fact that a lot of the internals is just
manipulating data frames. And by reframing the internals into familiar data wrangling
functional programming terms that we're all familiar with, we arrive at a conceptual understanding
of how the internals work. So this lets us write more powerful ggplot code as users while
still mostly abstracting away from the scary implementational details like ggproto and
baseR functions.
But if you are interested in that, ggtrace has other workflow functions that you can
use. So just really quickly, there's function from the capture workflow, like ggtrace capture
fn, which essentially records the behavior of a ggproto method when it executes, and
then you can have it as a standalone function. You have functions from the hijack workflow,
which kind of lets you pass or make ggproto methods return arbitrary values, and so you
can kind of try to hack the internals and see what you can come up with.
And yeah, that's it. ggtrace is on GitHub. Here's some links to other materials, and
I'd love to hear your feedback.